# Halting problem

The halting problem asks the question: “Given a Turing machine in an arbitrary configuration will it eventually halt?”. 

Given a Turing machine and some input that must be fed into that Turing machine, can you assert with absolute certainty that the machine will halt?

The fact that the above question’s answer is “No” and that it can never be asserted with absolute certainty that the machine will halt is indeed undecidable can be proved using a clever setup:

### Proof:

1. Assume that the Halting problem is decidable, i.e. there exists an algorithm (then there should exist a corresponding Turing machine) to assert that the machine will definitely halt on given input. Let us name this Turing machine M1.
2. This machine M1, takes as input the encoding of a Turing machine (M2) to test the halting problem on and the string to be run on M2.
3. The output of this decider M1 (’Decider’ since it asserts with absolute certainty that the machine will halt) is either accept (M2 halts on input string) or reject (M2 doesn’t halt on input string).
4. We now defined M3, which is slightly different from M1. M3 loops forever on strings that are accepted by it and it halts on strings that rejected by it.
    - The reason why this is done will be apparent soon. Turing machines can be modified in any way that one might want to modify them and so we have chosen the above modification.
5. M3 can be encoded as a binary string ‘s’. M1 takes as input a Turing machine M2 and an input string, the same is done by M3. 
6. We now give as input (to M3), its own binary encoding (representing the machine being fed into the setup) and a string (which is the machine encoding itself). 
7. Now, If M3 accepts its own encoding then the overall setup should’ve taken the route which led to the machine halting. The only case where the overall setup halts is when the given machine (as input) rejects the string (which is also given as input). We have a contradiction.
8. Similarly, if M3 rejects its own encoding then the overall setup should’ve taken the route which led to machine looping forever. The only case where the overall setup doesn’t halt is when the given machine (as input) accepts the string (which is also given as input). Again, we have a contradiction.

Therefore, the Halting problem is undecidable.

> The proof is a bit confusing on the first read, but going through it multiple times should give the reader enough clarity on the topic.
>