# Pre-requisite definitions

### **Alphabets:**

A finite non-empty set of symbols.

Examples:

- Σ = {0, 1} is the binary alphabet
- Σ = {a, b, · · · , z}

### **Strings:**

A finite sequence of symbols chosen from some arbitrary Alphabet.

Examples:

- 010010 over the alphabet {0, 1}
- 567657667 over the alphabet {5, 6, 7}

### **Languages:**

A set of strings each of which can be accepted by the Turing machine question. A formal language L, over the alphabet Σ, is a subset of Σ^∗.

Example: 

- L = {01, 00, 10, 11} over Σ = {0, 1}

> Σ^∗ = The set of all strings over an alphabet Σ.
> 

### Grammar:

Example:

P = { S → Aa, A → b }

Here S is the start symbol, A is a non-terminal, and a, b are terminals.

- Non-Terminals: If a symbol(s) can be re-written as another symbol(s), it is a non-Terminal
- Terminals: If it cannot be re-written as another symbol(s), it is a Terminal.
- Production Rules: These dictate how one symbol may be re-written as another.

A Grammar G is defined as a quadruple (N, T, S, P) where:

- N is a finite set of Non-Terminals
- T is a finite set of Terminals
- S ∈ N is a special symbol called the start symbol.
- P is the finite set of production rules.

### Problems & their Instances:

A problem is a question, a question that could be concerned with anything from “Is is gonna rain today?” to “How many marbles are present in the urn?”. An instance of the former question would be a particular day, so, the 1st of January could be an instance of the problem “Is it gonna rain today?”

- Decision problems: These problems have a binary label associated with them, the answer to “Will there be enough crop yield for the summer?” is a decision problem since there are only 2 possible answers to the question, namely, yes or no.

> The above concept will be further explored when studying decidable problems.
>