# Chomsky’s Hierarchy

**Noam Chomsky** defined 4 types of grammar(add link):

- Type 0: Also known as unrestricted grammar or phase structure grammar
    - The rules for type 0 grammar are : u → v, where u ∈ V^∗ N V^∗, v ∈ V^∗ and V = N ∪ T
        - u is a string of Non-Terminals and Terminals but it should have at least one Non-Terminal symbols.
        - If u consists of only Terminals, then it cannot be rewritten as something else and hence  the derivation terminates there.
- Type 1: Also known as Length Increasing grammar or Context Sensitive grammar.
    - Type-1 also takes the form u → v, with the difference in restriction over the length of the left hand side, i.e. it should be less than or equal to the length of the right hand side. ( |u| ≤ |v| )
- Type 2: Context free grammar.
    - These grammars take the following form: A → α, where A ∈ N, α ∈ V^∗
        - The symbols on the left hand side must be non-terminals and those on the right hand side may be anything.
- Type 3: Regular grammar.
    - The rules for this grammar are of the form : { A → aB, A → b} where A, B ∈ N, a ∈ T and b ∈ T ∪ {empty string}

The restrictions imposed increases as we move from Type 0 to Type 3. The restrictions may be summarized as the following:

- When restricting the length of the right hand side to be greater than or equal to the length of the left hand side (over a type 0 grammar), we get a type 1 grammar.
- If the left hand side is restricted to only consist of non-terminal symbols, we get type 2 grammar.
- If we force the rules to definitively have at most one non-terminal on the right hand side, we get type 3 grammars.

### Language generated by a given Grammar:

Let G = (N, T, S, P) be a grammar. The language generated by a grammar is denoted by L(G). Then the set L(G) = {w | w ∈ T^∗, S ∗⇒ w }

- *⇒ is the reflexive transitive closure of ⇒