# Generalized versions of Turing machines

There are many variations one can find of Turing machines, some of these include:

- One-way Infinite TM
- Multi-tape TM
- Non-deterministic TM
- Multi-dimensional TM

It is also possible to run all of these as single tape Turing machines (and vice versa) using a few clever techniques. The below aims to give the reader a brief description of each of the variations mentioned above while also demonstrating how all of these can be run using only single tape Turing machine.

> Note: To experiment with and simulate these Turing machines, you may make use of a python package I wrote for simulating a variety of Turing machines. (turmachpy)[link]
> 

### One-way Infinite Turing machine:

Turing machines are defined by a two way infinite tape, restricting the tape to only be infinite in one direction is pretty straight forward when trying to simulate the same on a standard TM.

- To simulate a one way infinite TM on a standard 2-way infinite TM, we use a special marker ‘Ψ’ to mark the end which is not infinite.
- To simulate a 2-way infinite TM on a, we introduce the 2 track model, where we have an additional track inside the existing tape.
    - The idea is to use the second track as a way to ‘move’ beyond the boundary imposed by the one way infinite TM. This is done simply by moving towards the same direction where the infinite-ness exists but since it’s on the track below the main one, you technically move in the opposite direction (which is restricted in the case of a 1-way infinite TM).

### Multi-tape Turing machine:

This version uses multiple tapes, each with its own read/write head. The transition function needs to be defined relevantly for the machine’s’ simulation.

The initial configuration of the multi-tape TM is as follows:

- The input is present on the first tape.
- Every other cell of every other tape holds the blank symbol.
- The finite control is initialized to be in the initial state.
- The head of the first tape points at the leftmost symbol of the input.
- Every other tape head point to an arbitrary cell.

One move made by such a machine is determined by the current state and symbol read by every tape-head. The same can be seen in the set-wise definition of the transition function, of which an example is:

- δ(q0, a, b, c) = (q1, [A, R], [B, L], [C, R]) where a, b, c are symbols read by 3 tapes and A, B, C are the symbols written to those cells on that particular tape.

> The time taken by a standard TM M1 to simulate n moves of a k-tape TM M2 is of complexity O(n^2).
> 

### Non-deterministic Turing machine:

Turing machines in general are assumed to be deterministic, meaning that there exists a transition for every state over every symbol in the alphabet. 

A non-deterministic Turing machine differs from a deterministic Turing machine in only the transition function, where the finite control, when in a particular state and the read/write head reads a particular symbol, there may be more than one possible move that the machine can take.

To reach the halting state, the idea is simple:

- A tree of states over symbolic transitions is created and this tree is explored level by level using the Breadth-first search algorithm.
- For each level in the generated tree, we simulate the transitions up until that particular node and check if the current state is the halting state, if it isn't we keep exploring.

### Multi-dimensional Turing machine:

These machines have their tape extending in more than just one direction, i.e. a grid like tape for a 2D TM. In the case of a 2D TM, the difference is apparent in the transition function:

- δ : Q × Γ → Q × Γ × {L, R, U, D}

To simulate this variant of a Turing machine on a standard TM,