# Restricted versions of Turing machines

Restricted variations of Turing machines with the same language recognizing power as that of standard Turing machines. Some of these are:

- Multi-stack machines (2 pushdown tape machine):
    - The idea is to have 2 stacks capable of storing symbols, these stacks are either popped/pushed depending on the move specified by the transition function.
    - For a better idea picture a standard Turing machine with the read/write head on position ‘x’. All the symbols before ‘x’ are pushed down in stack1 and all symbols after ‘x’ and ‘x’ itself are pushed down in stack2. Depending on the move specified by the transition function, ‘x’ will be popped and pushed into stack1 or the top of stack1 will be popped and pushed into stack2.
    - With this setup one can simulate a single tape Turing machine with ease.
- Counter machines (4 counter machine 2 counter machine):
    - A counter holds a non-negative integer and can therefore represent any binary string.
    - Using the same idea as before, we can have all the symbols before ‘x’ be stored as an integer in coutner1 and all the symbols after ‘x’ and ‘x’ itself be stored as an integer in counter2.
    - Depending on the transition we either divide or multiply each of the counters by 2. (left/right shift)
- Theorem : Every recursively enumerable language is accepted by a two-counter machine.
- Theorem : Every recursively enumerable language is accepted by a four-counter machine.
- Both of the above are clearly valid since any counter machine with a minimum of 2 counters can accurately simulate the transitions specified by the transition function the same way a standard Turing machine would.